Testing, testing.
This is a test.
This is an interview on April 1st, 1985.
That's 1985 with Norman Borlaug.
This is a test.
Today is April 1st, 1985.
This is the second part of our interview.
The first time we talked about your background.
We talked about education in Iowa and at the University of Minnesota.
the Rockefeller Foundation, and then we started in on Mexico.
And in Mexico, we were talking about your first experimentation in Mexico in the 40s, and we moved all the way up to about, well, the weed experiments into the 50s.
And some of the problems that you had, the disbelief of the farmers, and the problems in general with the government of Mexico,
And we ended the last one dealing with the problems of the early 1950s and getting Mexican farmers to adopt a number of your methods, especially with seeds and fertilizer.
So, there's a bunch of questions that I'd like to ask.
Did we talk about the first field day, how few came?
Yes, we talked about that.
And how it picked up in the subsequent years?
And we have transcribed the interview, and it's about 200 pages long, those first five tapes.
This is tape number six.
It's about 200 pages long, and I'll bring it to you next week.
I'm not quite done editing it.
We want to put it on the word processor, but anyway, what we want to do here is get back to the late 1940s and into the early 1950s, because when I was reading over the interview, I thought of a number of other questions that I'd like to ask you.
One was the crossbreeding process or cross-pollinization process that you used.
And I'd like to know, to begin with, if this process that you used was different from previous processes.
In other words, were you making headway in the product, the finer
form of wheat, but also the process.
Yes, I think that two things were involved in the procedures that we used in our breeding program.
It was done in order to accelerate the rate of development of varieties.
In other words, to cut in half the time required to produce a variety.
Somewhere back in the previous
tape, I'm sure there was some mention of this, but let me repeat to make sure that it's in proper perspective.
When I took my genetics and plant breeding at the University of Minnesota, with the techniques and methods that were then in process or in vogue, in use, not only in Minnesota but around the world, it required 10 to
11 years to produce a rust-resistant variety.
The reason being that in part the dogma of the time was that you had to select the progeny of a cross in the soil and climatic condition in which you hoped to grow it.
Otherwise you would have a poor fit between the genotype, the plant variety that you selected, and the environment.
and you would have, as a result, unstable yield.
It would vary from year to year.
When I arrived in Mexico, I saw that there had been three devastating stem rust epidemics, three successive ones in the year 39, 40, and 41 in the state of Sonora, which I perceived as being one of the areas of Mexico that had a large potential to increase production.
three successive epidemics just a few years before I arrived and that it would take by standard methods of breeding three to ten to eleven years I decided we had to use a different technique and this is where we developed what subsequently become known as the shuttle breeding technique where we grew
The first segregating generation, that is after you make the cross, the seed coming from those artificially made crosses, the first generation are intermediate in most characteristics between the two parents.
The second time you regrow the seed from those crossed plants, they are all different.
They are segregated for many different characteristics.
Second-generation plants were planted first in either the Valley of Mexico or Toluca Valley.
Both are near Mexico City.
They differ by a thousand feet in elevation, but they are both at about 19 degrees latitude.
And the plantings were made in May, when the days are getting longer.
Artificial epidemics
and also natural infection create heavy epidemics of three of the rusts and also some other foliar diseases because it rains almost every day.
The best disease-resistant plants and those that also combined desirable agronomic type that the farmer would be willing to accept that looked like they would yield
give high yields of grain were selected from those infected progeny.
Thrashed individually and the seed of the best after being screened for plumpness of grain were shipped to Sonora, Mexico in the Yaqui Valley near Ciudad Obregón, Sonora.
where they were planted in early November when the days are getting shorter.
And that's at an elevation of about 100 feet above sea level on the coastal plain and about 28 and a half degrees latitude north.
Again, artificial epidemics of rust are developed and the best plants are selected, thrashed individually.
And the seed from those are then shuttled back to the high valleys again.
And the process is repeated.
The result was that in three and a half years, we had identified some very promising new varieties.
And they were in the hands of the farmers in reasonable quantities of seed in four years rather than ten.
Sure.
Four, four and a half, because we grew two generations a year.
Now, the speed, the reason for using the shuttle technique to get two generations a year was to simply be able to cut in half the time required to produce the rust resistant variety.
I figured that if we had tried to use the old techniques,
One generation a year, 10 or 11 years to produce a variety, we'd had another rust epidemic and I'd gotten thrown out of the country as being unsuccessful.
I wasn't very interested in having that happen.
But it turned out that these varieties, we soon saw that some of the best ones,
that were best up in Toluca or the Valley of Mexico at 8,500 feet in Toluca Valley or 7,600 feet in the Valley of Mexico, planted when the days are getting longer.
We're also the best when planted up at Cedar Obregon at 28.5 degrees and 100 feet above sea level when the days are getting shorter.
And this had great implications because in a mountainous country, following the old techniques, you would have to have had a large number of varieties to cover the needs of all of those distinct mountain valleys.
And since we had no seed organizations, organizations to multiply and distribute the seed,
Had we had a large number with a new organization, young people inexperienced, almost invariably you'd have a lot of snafus sending the wrong seed in the wrong place.
And so it had this advantage.
Now much later, after we had broadened the
resistance to other diseases we had improved them from the standpoint of milling and baking and we had incorporated the short straw into these more recent varieties we continued to use the same technique and in the end it was this
The breadth of adaptation that was obtained through this shuttle breeding, which permitted these to be shipped around the world to hold shiploads full of sea and have them adapted.
That shuttle breeding, plus having brought them in contact with widely different populations of disease organisms in the natural selection process.
So this was looked on in the beginning as we were wild men.
But subsequently, it has become a standard procedure in many parts of the world, most parts of the world, for spring weeds.
You can't do this when you're working with winter habit weeds, because they're generally planted in, depending where you are, but in September, they're not harvested until July, so there's not enough left of the year to make a second generation.
Let's stop.
okay there was another issue that I wanted to talk to you about and we got about this far when we quit last time and that was the different strains of wheat that you used for the process in the late 40s well when we began our program we made as wide a collection as we could get our hands on many of them and of course especially in the spring wheat type
Those that will, when planted, will head without putting them through a cold shock treatment and artificially increasing the hours of sunlight.
I should have pointed out that when we were doing this shuttle breeding, it was before the importance of photoperiodism, or day length, was thought to have been important.
in agricultural crops.
And so this was part of the unraveling of all of this.
And that was mentioned in the last part.
Okay.
So when we began our program, we obtained seed of as many varieties as we could get from the Canada Department of Agriculture and the Canadian universities from the northern hard red spring wheat
region of the U.S., which implies North Dakota, South Dakota, Minnesota, Wisconsin, and a few from Montana, California varieties.
And then, in addition, some of the first materials we got were from Dr. McFadden here at Texas A&M.
Dr. McFadden, E.S.
McFadden,
was the breeder, while he was at South Dakota, who made the cross between Jaroslav Emmer, one of the durum wheat group, and the bread wheat, J-A-R-O-S-L-A-V, Emmer, E-M-M-E-R, crossed with one of the popular bread wheats, and from this he obtained an unusual breadth of stem rust resistance, which subsequently was used
together with other sources of resistance in breeding of many of the spring wheats and also winters that carried stem rust resistance in other parts of the world, in northern US and Canada.
We received some material from him that was still segregating, impure, and from this
We selected out one of the first varieties that was distributed in Mexico.
It didn't happen to fit Sonora because it grew rank, which all of them did at that time, tall.
But it had a weak neck, and when the wind would blow and it was hot and dry, it would snap off and fall on the ground.
But in central Mexico, where this was not a problem, actually a variety which we called Supremo,
211, S-U-P-R-E-M-O, 211, was derived directly from this and reselection from this material.
It was a cross of Surpresa, S-U-R-P-R-E-Z-A, times Hope-Mediterranean, a three-way cross.
Now, in addition to the aforementioned
sources of parental material.
We of course used a lot of Australian varieties, which had in part been used elsewhere, but they in many ways fit Mexican conditions better than most other weeds because of length of day, but they were very susceptible to stripe rust.
In addition, about the second year we were there, we made huge collections of the best head types in many of the farmers' fields.
The wheats which were grown in Mexico at that time in most areas were mixtures of many types.
Unknown land races probably that went back, in some cases, some of the types to early colonial times that still existed as mixtures in farmers' fields.
I guess we selected out about 6,000 different heads from different parts of the Republic.
They too, the best of these, after they'd been subjected to rust epidemics, were used also as fernal material.
And I found also in the Mexican collection of the Mexican Department of Agriculture about 30 wheats that had come from different parts of the world.
And there were a couple there, three,
that were used extensively.
One was mentana, M-E-N-T-A-N-A, which was of Italian origin, had broad adaptation and rather good yield, had some undesirable characteristics like weak straw and susceptible to stem rust.
There were two wheats that were labeled that came from Morocco.
Marroquii, M-A-R-R-O-Q-U-I, 588 and 476.
These three weeds were used as one of the parents into which we were trying to incorporate better rust resistance.
We made large numbers of crosses every generation, twice a year.
This, of course, generated a tremendous gene pool of diversity.
diverse types.
And each generation we always tried to provoke severe artificial epidemics of rust to help us pick up those plants that seem to carry the best combination of resistance.
Not just the one rust, but the three rusts that we were engaged in battling with and also to certain other diseases.
So I guess that's
more or less in the background.
Wasn't there also a Nairobi type that was used or some sub-Sahara African type?
Well, there were some Kenyan wheats.
I forgot to mention those.
The Kenyan wheats back in the 1930s were being used
for other sources of stem rust resistance.
Kenya too was in a place where there were very often very severe epidemics of rust and the Australians in particularly had gone to Kenya.
Let me say that the original Kenyan breeding program was established by Britain and they had done considerable work on
trying to incorporate rust resistance, stem rust resistance.
Where the sources of resistance came from isn't entirely clear.
Part of it may have been McFadden's hope type, but in addition there were other genes involved that had nothing to do with the McFadden type hope resistance, nor did it have anything to do with the
thatcher type which was another type of resistance that was developed at the university of minnesota for stem rust resistance subsequently in our program in mexico and in many other parts of the world for stem rust we combined the mcfadden hope type and the minnesota thatcher type and and the kenyan stem rust resistance as a matter of fact i think that probably
A good share of the wheat varieties that are grown in the world today in areas where stem rust is a problem are the result of intercrossing those three basic types.
Now these Kenyan types were recognized by the Australians as a good source of rust resistance in the early 30s and they were taken to Australia and intercrossed into theirs.
And by way of that, they came also to the U.S.
I saw them for the first time when I was in graduate school at Minnesota.
And so we used all three of these sources of resistance, trying to incorporate Stimras resistance.
I think it might be of interest to note here that as a result, it didn't happen from these first crosses, but subsequent intercrossing of the
good Mexican varieties and then again with other wheats around the world.
We have had now stable stem rust resistance around the world since 1951.
The varieties that were released from 1952 onward have not changed in their stem rust resistance.
So it's, let's say 52, 62, 72, 82, more than something approaching 35 years, 34 years.
Their stem rust resistance is still as good as it was when they were released.
But we can't say that about leaf rust or stripe rust because the leaf rust resistance is highly unstable today.
And most varieties retain their resistance only
five years.
Some of them occasionally will last ten years, but it's rare.
And so it's a continuing fight on leaf rust and stripe rust.
There's another issue that I'd like to talk about, and that is dwarf plants.
Yes.
Could you explain that for a while?
Well, all of the original wheats that we worked with in Mexico, and this was true elsewhere in the world at that time, were tall growing.
And when moisture conditions were favorable and when soil fertility was at a high level, they would grow up to your shoulder or sometimes as high as your head.
And there seemed to be, at that time, the belief, at least in Mexico and I think in many developing nations, that a good indication of the goodness of the crop at any time was how tall it grew.
But this was a fallacy because generally when they grew rank like that,
if there came a rain storm or a wind storm, when they were after heading, they would lodge and fall over and break over and consequently the grain would not fill right and moreover it complicated very greatly the harvest.
On those tall varieties, when they were growing on very soil depleted,
soils depleted of fertility.
Of course, they didn't grow that right.
They grew belt high.
But those same varieties on those poor soils, when you fertilize the soil to restore its fertility, would grow up again shoulder high or head high.
And then came a storm, or when you irrigated and there came a wind, they'd all fall down.
We worked for many years, we could see these problems.
probably better in Mexico since at that time most of the wheat was grown under irrigation and time and again you had a beautiful crop standing there and the last irrigation the wind would come and knock it all down.
So we looked for other genetic sources of resistance picked up every short plant we found segregating out none of them were worthwhile they were apparently most
And in those early days, we didn't even have microscopes, much less cytologists to help us.
And so... Was the quality of the grain in the smaller plants in those early days inferior to the quality of the grain in the large plants?
No, they're independent of one another.
You can have good milling and baking quality in a tall straw variety or in a short straw variety.
But it did so happen that in the short straw varieties, when we started working with the Japanese Noreen 10 dwarfing genes, N-O-R-I-N, 10 dwarfing genes, that they were very soft weeds, very poor quality, and so it took some time to get rid of that after we had already incorporated the short stature.
So we looked in all of our material, we looked everywhere,
We got the US Department of Agricultural Collection of World Weeds, grew them in short rows, but we never did find anything that showed very much promise on dwarfness until, I suppose it was in the early 50s, 52 or so, when I was talking
I went on a trip through South America to look at the international rust nurseries, which was a set of... This might be interesting to mention first.
In 1949, 50, and 51, there was widespread stem rust epidemic throughout North America, especially bad in the spring wheat regions
of the U.S.
and Canada.
There was damage also in the winter wheat region of the U.S.
As a result of this, there was great fear that this was going to continue to be a serious problem, and so the U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Canada Department of Agriculture, and the U.S.
universities, especially in the spring wheat region,
I had a meeting in Winnipeg, Canada.
I suppose it was in 1950.
I'm not sure.
I think you can find the date probably in that Rockefeller Foundation book, The Campaigns Against Hunger.
And Dr. Harar from Mexico and I attended that.
As a result of that meeting, it was decided that in order to identify good sources of stem rust resistance, they would make a uniform nursery, the USDA, Dr. H. A. Rodenheiser, R-H-O-D-E-N-H-E-I-S-E-R, who was then the chief plant pathologist for the USDA, with the collaboration of Dr. Thorvalder Johnson,
of the Canada Department of Agriculture and Dr. E.C.
Stakeman from the University of Minnesota who was also an agent for the USDA as well as a professor of plant pathology at Minnesota and a very knowledgeable person on wheat diseases.
They made out a list and got the seeds of everything that had been reported to be resistant to stem rust in any place in the world.
And then they asked also for
programs to submit material, breeding programs, that they thought might be useful in this.
And we were far enough along in our programs so that we submitted quite a bit of material.
These were made into envelopes with about three grams of seed or less, planted in a one-meter row at
The first year, I think it was planted at about 12 locations from Argentina to Canada, subsequently at many more locations in the Americas and then around the world.
And it was the predecessor of international testing around the world for disease reactions.
Well, the reason I went off on this was that in about 1951 or 2,
I went with Dr. Bales to read all of these nurseries for their disease reaction in Brazil, in Uruguay, in Argentina, Chile, Peru, and Ecuador, as well as a couple of locations in Mexico.
And while we were on this trip, Bales told me about when we were talking about lodging and falling over of the plants because they grew too tall.
He said, you know, about a year or two ago, we received seven samples of very short dwarf weeds from Japan.
Dr. Salmon, S-A-L-M-O-N, I believe his initials was S.
who was the agricultural officer on General MacArthur's staff, following the occupation.
And it was his job to look at all of the agriculture.
And in one station, he came across these very short weeds.
He picked out seven of those and sent small samples back to the USDA and they went through quarantine in Arizona, where they grow them one generation.
And then he had subsequently sent some of these to Orville Vogel at Washington State, who was interested in dwarfing also.
So, Dr. Bales, B.B.
Bales, B-A-Y-L-E-S, suggested that I contact him and see if I could get a few seeds, maybe even of the ones he had already crossed to Washington weeds, which I did.
And in late 53, I got a few seeds across the second generation, which meant that every seed was different.
an F2, second-generation plant that was considered to be one of the best.
I think I got seed from three plants from Dr. Vogel.
These were crosses of Brevor, B-R-E-V-O-R, times Noreen, N-O-R-I-N-10.
It turned out that, of course, these were winter weeds and I couldn't make the cross because I didn't fertilize them.
Well, I made the cross, but they headed so late that I had
couldn't make them on the Mexican varieties as the female because they were going by.
I finally found a little pollen from one of the late tillers on the Mexican and used that using the Brever Norin 10 as the female.
But then the rust came along and killed all of the plants, so I never got viable seed from that because it turned out that they were extremely susceptible to stem rust.
So the next time with the few seeds I had, this was in 55.
I planted them in Sonora.
Then we made the cross and we made a lot of them.
And we could soon see that... And so, let me just get it straight.
What we're doing now is we're crossing the dwarfs that basically came from Japan.
Right.
With the stem rust resistant varieties that you had developed in Mexico.
They went through another stage, you see.
The Japanese were winter types, meant that they wouldn't hit under our conditions unless we subjected them to low temperatures for about six weeks, which we didn't have facilities to do, and then increased the hours of light soon after we took them out of the coal shop.
We didn't have facilities then to do it, now we do it regularly.
These Japanese had been crossed to another winter wheat, those from Washington State by Dr. Orville, V-O-G-E-L.
He picked out a lot of best plants, but he sent me about three that he thought would be a good thing for me to use.
So, I crossed into those.
And after the first failure, but then when we did it the right direction, we could see immediately in the second generation, as they start to separate out, that we could recover some very short plants that were well tillered, had a lot of stems, big heads.
But in those early generations, for the next three, four, five years, most of them had miserable grains, shriveled grains.
but by taking the best plants, the best rust-resistant plants.
Just low-quality grain.
Then we would cross those back to our best tall-strawed Mexicans and again select for the short.
And eventually, of course, we had to... Eventually, by 62, we started seeing some pretty good types.
We would not have multiplied... So it took about seven years then?
Right.
And then twice a year.
But we wouldn't have multiplied those first two, the 60, Pangamo 62 and Pateek 62, because they still didn't have the quality of grain that we wanted.
But in the farmer's field days, when the farmer saw these the first time, they were like blackbirds.
They got out in the plots, and before we could control them, there were heads going into pockets, every different direction, because they knew what lodging
It was costing them.
We told them that those were no good, that we had better ones coming, but you don't stop after the farmers get over.
Remember the same farmers that a few years before had, you couldn't give them seed.
But suddenly they carried these things off in their pocket, and two years later, they were, this would have been in 60.
field day in the 60s.
By then we'd see mixed plots around, little plots on farmer's field, and so we decided, well, even though we wanted to multiply the first dwarf, Sonora 64, because it had good milling and baking quality,
We had no choice.
Either we were going to have all of that mixed stuff coming into the mill, which was worse than the two that we had knew yielded very well.
Piteak 62 and Penghamo 62, so we put them out, knowing that they weren't the quality that we eventually wanted, but that we would follow those up two years later, which we did.
So that's how they came on the market.
As soon as they came on the market in a big way, they created the first years a big black market.
Everybody wanted them and there was all kinds of shenanigans going on from farmer to farmer.
But I've seen that in many places and I think the
good is, the good part of it is better than the bad.
Because most people don't buy very big quantities when you're buying on the black market, they buy a small amount and it doesn't hurt them.
How did it get out to the black market?
Well, in this way.
People who are working at the institute themselves would take some seed.
What would happen, sooner or later there was no seed organizations that were capable, the government had one.
and they tried to keep a price control on it.
But, hell, they'd make a contract with a farmer, but people would get in those fields and carry it off also, and so soon you had little patches of it everywhere, and then it was whatever the market would demand.
I saw this happen many years later in India, even in the worst shape.
The black market would be for a kilo of seed, and that, he may have penned an outlandish price for that kilo, but he would grow that in his own plot very thinly, and the next year he'd have enough to cover quite a bit of his plot, and the second year his whole farm.
So, basically, after you developed the door plant in about 60,
It took it two to three more years to get a high quality grain, which would have been comparable to the large plants that you had developed by 55.
Right.
So it was 64 before we had the quality that we wanted, two years later.
There's another thing I might... But they used the two original ones.
They became very popular despite
their weaknesses in the grain.
And the latter type didn't supersede it?
Oh yes, they took over.
In the case of one of them, the penkamo persisted because the pitik had not only a bad baking quality, but in years when it got hot too early, before the grain was completely ripe,
The grain would have a tendency to swivel, be light in test weight, and that mean the flour yield would also be lower.
Pengamo, on the other hand, had plump grain, even under high temperature conditions of maturation.
So it didn't affect that.
So the flour yields were perfectly okay, but the strength of the gluten was not good.
But as soon as they got Sonora 64 out,
And Mayo 64 made no difference, because then they could blend the flower of the Pankamo, even though it didn't have this good elasticity and low volume.
They could blend it, Miller's could, with the good quality ones.
So it hung around for a while.
Now, I'd like to ask another question about, it seems to me that you made great strides in procedure and dwarf plants and stem rust.
and of course, tremendously increasing the amount of grain per plant.
But, what about the impact of these developments on the scientific community?
Were you writing articles at that time on these different- We didn't have much time to write articles.
As a matter of fact, it was a continuous
we were subjected to lots of gigging and poking and prodding about the wheat program never was very prolific in writing learned articles compared to the maize program.
The maize program, corn program, put out a whole series of beautiful scientific publications concerning the
traditional land-raised, different types of corn from the different part, and they worked with Mangosdorf, who was one of the consultants from Harvard on this, as to how these originated, kind of theoretically, but there was a lot of good work behind it.
The origin of these old types, primitive types.
And they put out a lot of good publications.
We can find our effort pretty much through our annual report and once in a while we go to a science meeting to make another presentation.
This precedes the problem with the dwarf wheat, but in each year when I turn in my annual report, I would say, where in the hell are your scientific publications?
The corn program is putting out all of these beautiful publications
where's the publications from the wheat program?
I just have to bite my tongue until he did this in 57 when I turned in my annual report, which I did religiously, and I thought they were pretty good.
And the same issue came up, why don't you do something about this?
And at that time, Mexico reached self-sufficiency in wheat.
And my question was,
What the hell did we come down here for?
To write learned papers, which you can do better from American universities, or to fill empty bellies.
That's the last I ever heard of that one.
But, I guess in about 19, well I have a copy around here someplace, but I can't play hands on it.
But probably in 1952,
I was invited to give a talk at the New York Academy of Science, which I did.
And, in that little publication, I told the history of the Mexican Wheat Program.
and its accomplishments, self-sufficiency, and so on, and then the story of the incorporation of the dwarf genes.
And in this was the first picture of dwarf plants that were, this must have been, I can tell you about what year this would have been, 57 or thereabouts, but the latest 58.
and what the implications of these dwarf wheats might be.
That's the first published paper of these little dwarfs in Mexico.
And did that get fairly wide circulation in America?
Well, how did American scientists and universities find out about your work?
These international rust nurseries, you see, everybody was nervous in the US and Canada and around the world with these outbreaks in 49, 50, and 51.
And in order to accelerate their program, then there was, well, I think the people behind it was Dr. Donald Fletcher, F-L-E-T-C-H-E-R, of the Crop Quality Council.
I believe at that time it was still called the Rust Prevention Association.
It was a private little group that was sustained by contributions from agri-industries, pretty much.
The railroads, the farm machinery companies, the banks of the northern spring wheat region.
made annual surveys of the wheat crop, did a lot of things that used to have an annual meeting talking about problems.
Dr. Donald Fletcher was probably one of the most knowledgeable people about the whole Russ situation.
He was trained with statement.
As a matter of fact, they were close friends.
When these epidemics were threatening,
Well, not only threatening, I mean they did great damage.
We worked out a deal where the U.S.
spring wheat regions, Minnesota, North Dakota, South Dakota, Wisconsin, Montana, and the Canada Department of Agriculture could send their seeds to Mexico.
And we knew that they were a very long day sensitive, so we would plant them a month earlier, the early days of October.
rather than in November, like we planted towers on our station.
First year it was on some rented land.
Then they moved on to our station.
And so every year...